\label{chapter:introduction}%
%
Controlling complexity is a central goal of any programming language, especially
as software written in that language grows. The burgeoning field of
\emph{variation theory} and \emph{variational
  programming}~\cite{EW11gttse,EW11tosem,HW16fosd,CEW16ecoop,Walk14onward}
attempt to control a kind of complexity which is induced into software when many
\emph{similar yet distinct} kinds of the same software must coexist. For
example, software is often \emph{ported} to other platforms, creating similar,
yet distinct instances of that software which must be maintained. Such instances
of variation are ubiquitous: Web applications are tested on multiple servers;
programming languages maintain backwards compatibility and so do software
libraries; databases evolve over time, locale and data; and device drivers must
work with varying processors and architectures. Variation theory and variational
programming have been successful in small
systems~\cite{ES18diagrams,SE17fosd,MMWWK17vamos}, yet it has not been tested in
a performance demanding practical domain. In the words of Joe
Armstrong\cite{armstrongThesis}, ``No theory is complete without proof that the
ideas work in practice''; this is the project of this thesis, to put the ideas
of \emph{variation} and \emph{variational programming} to the test in the
practical domain of \ac{sat}.

To my knowledge there is no formal definition of a \emph{variation-aware} or
\emph{variational} system, and the terms are used interchangeably in the
research literature. For clarity, I provide the following working definitions:

\begin{definition}[Variational Problem]
  A problem is variational if separate instances of the problem share elements
  which are critical to solving the instance of the problem, and elements which
  are not shared are able to be deterministically represented.
\end{definition}
%
For example, a non-variational problem is finding a single sum of a set of
numbers, such as $\kf{ns} = \set{1,2,3,5,7}$. The problem becomes variational
when we want to find the sum of $\kf{ns}$ and another sum for a related set
$\prime*{ns} = \set{1,2,3,13,17}$ which shares three elements $1$, $2$, and $3$.
$\sum_{n \in{} ns} n$ and $\sum_{n \in{} \prime*{ns}} n$ are separate instances
of the same problem, the shared elements between them cannot be ignored without
changing their respective solutions, and the elements which are not in both sets
can be deterministically represented either by a subset or property: \setc{n}{n
  \in \kf{ns}, n \notin \prime*{ns}}.
%
Now we can define a variational system as a system which exploits these facts to
solve a variational problem.

\begin{definition}[Variational or variation-aware System]
  A system is variational or variation-aware if it uses the shared elements of a
  variational problem to solve all or some instances of the problem.
\end{definition}
%
Thus, a variational summation of $\kf{ns}$ and \prime*{ns} should exploit the
fact that there are shared elements. For example, a variational summation might
translate the problem into two sub-problems, one to sum the shared elements and
one to sum the rest. With this procedure the summation of $\kf{ns}$ is $\sum_{n
  \in{} ns} n = \sum_{s \in{} \kf{ss}} s + \sum_{n \in{} \kf{ns} \setminus{}
  \kf{ss}} n$ where $\kf{ss} = \setc{s}{s \in{} \kf{ns} \cap{} \prime*{ns}}$.
Crucially the summation of the shared elements should only occur once, and then
be reused for the sum of \prime*{ns}.

The major contributions of this thesis is the formalization of a
\emph{\acl{vpl}}, \emph{variational \acl{sat}}, and the construction of a
\emph{variational \ac{sat} solver}. In the next section I motivate the use of
variation theory and variational techniques in \acl{sat}. In addition to work on
variational \ac{sat} several other contributions are made. The thesis extends
variational \acl{sat} to variational \ac{smt}. It presents reusable techniques
and architecture for constructing \emph{variational or variation-aware} systems
using the non-variational counterparts of these systems for other domains. It
shows that, with the concept of variation, the variational \ac{smt} and \ac{sat}
solvers can be parallelized. Lastly, this thesis is the culmination of many
conversations, arguments and work from myself and many others over the last five
years. To honor their contributions I use the first-person plural ``we'', rather
than ``I'' for the remainder of the thesis.

\section{Motivation and Impact}
\input{Chapters/Introduction/Motivation}

\section{Contributions and Outline of this Thesis}
\input{Chapters/Introduction/Contributions}

%%% Local Variables:
%%% mode: latex
%%% TeX-master: "../../thesis"
%%% End: